# UMI-VarCal

# Description
* Software for analyzing BAM/SAM files produced by an Illumina MiSeq sequencer using UMI (Unique Molecular Identifiers). The software starts by building a pileup based on the regions specified in the BED file. This software integrates an extraction tool that can be used to extract UMI tags from the start of the reads. The software has also a calling tool for calling variants and that outputs the results under VCF format. Although SAM files generated by an Illumina MiSeq sequencer were used to develop this tool, it should work on BAM/SAM files generated by any other sequencer as long as they respect the Sequence Alignment/Map Format Specification.
* Authors: Vincent SATER, Pierre-Julien VIAILLY, Thierry LECROQ, Élise PRIEUR-GASTON
* Contact: vincent.sater@gmail.com
* Reference: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa053
* Reference: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/775817v1 (Preprint)

# Requirements
* Unix-based operating system
* Python 3.3 and later with the following packages to be installed and up to date: msgpack (version 0.5.6), pyfasta, pysam, scipy and statsmodels


# Installation

	1- git clone --recursive https://gitlab.com/vincent-sater/umi-varcal
	2- Go to the functions folder in the downloaded directory :
	3- Delete the 3 files : functions.so, functions.c and functions.cpython-35m-x86_64-linux-gnu.so
	4- Open a terminal and run the following command : 
		python3 setup.py build_ext --inplace

# Usage

There are 2 tools available in this software:
* extract
* call


To get help on a specific tool, type:

	python3 umi-varcal.py <tool> 
or 

	python3 umi-varcal.py <tool> --help
or

	python3 umi-varcal.py <tool> -h

To use a specific tool, type:

	python3 umi-varcal.py <tool> [tool arguments]

	

## Extracting UMI tags

### Description
The extraction tool allows to extract the UMI sequence from the SAM/BAM sequence and add it to the end of the read ID, preceded by an '_'. The UMI is always extracted from the start of the sequence. Extracting the UMI from within the sequence is not handled by this tool.

### Dependencies
* bwa
* Python module: pysam

### Required arguments

**-f, --fasta=FILE (case sensitive)**\
*The reference genome in FASTA format with its index present in the same directory. 
It is recommended that you enter the FASTA file full path. 
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/hg19.fasta*

**-i, --input=FILE (case sensitive)**\
*The input file SAM/BAM generated by the sequencer. 
It is recommended that you enter the input file full path. 
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/ind1.sam*

**-l, --umi_length=INT**\
*The length of the UMI sequence to extract. 
The value must be a valid integer.
If not precised, the default value (umi_length = 12) will be used*


### Optional arguments

**-t, --bwa_threads=INT**\
*The number of cores to be used for the bwa alignment. Using more cores will significantly reduce the alignment time.
The value of this parameter defaults to 1*



### Example

    python3 umi-varcal.py extract -i /home/.../test.sam -f /home/.../hg19.fa -l 12 -t 5


### Output

The tool will automatically create a directory in the current directory called EXTRACTED. It will contain a folder named after the sample input. In this directory, you can find the extracted R1 FASTQ, the extracted R2 FASTQ, the extracted BAM (with its index) and the extracted SAM file.



## Calling variants

### Description
A tool for calling variants in a SAM/BAM file from which the UMI tags were extracted. The calling tool starts by building a pileup based on the regions specified in the BED file. Given that the UMI tags had already been extracted correctly, this tool will call variants and output the results under VCF format. Although BAM/SAM files generated by an Illumina MiSeq sequencer were used to develop this tool, it should work on BAM/SAM files generated by any other sequencer as long as they respect the Sequence Alignment/Map Format Specification.


### Dependencies

* Python modules:   
	* pysam
	* msgpack-python (version 0.5.6)
    * pyfasta
    * scipy.stats
    * statsmodels.stats.multitest

### Required arguments

**-f, --fasta=FILE (case sensitive)**\
*The reference genome in FASTA format with its index present in the same directory.
It is recommended that you enter the FASTA file full path.
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/hg19.fasta*

**-b, --bed=FILE (case sensitive)**\
*The panel design file in a BED format. It is recommended that you enter the BED file full path.
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/design.bed*

**-i, --input=FILE (case sensitive)**\
*The input file SAM/BAM generated by the sequencer and from which the UMI tags have already been extracted from the sequences and and added at the end of the read ID, preceded by an '_'. This format is the only format accepted by the variant caller. It is recommended that you enter the input file's full path.
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/ind1.sam*



### Optional arguments

**-p, --pileup=FILE (case sensitive)**\
*The PILEUP file for the SAM file previously dumped during a older analysis with the same BED and FASTA files. This is not the pileup format generated by SAMtools. If specified, the tool will attempt te retrieve the counts of each position from the PILEUP file instead of rebuilding the pileup from scratch, a process that is relatively fast and can save time. 
It is recommended that you enter the PILEUP file full path. 
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/ind1.pileup*

**-o, --output=DIR (case sensitive)**\
*The output directory in which your files will be generated. It is recommended that you enter the output dir full path.
For example : /home/my_dir/my_subdir/out_dir*

**-c, --cores=INT**\
*The number of cores to be used for the analysis. Using more cores will significantly reduce analysis time but RAM usagewill be higher (up to 3x higher). The value of this parameter defaults to 1*

**--min_base_quality=INT**\
*The minimum value for which a base with a certain quality is considered as "good". Only bases with a quality >= min_base_quality will be considered. The value of this parameter defaults to 10* 

**--min_read_quality=INT**\
*The minimum value for which a read with a certain mean quality is considered as "good". Only reads with a quality >= min_read_quality will be considered. The value of this parameter defaults to 20*

**--min_mapping_quality=INT**\
*The minimum value for which a read with a certain mapping  quality is considered as "good". Only bases with a mapping quality >= min_mapping_quality will be considered. The value of this parameter defaults to 20*

**--min_variant_umi=INT**\
*The minimum count for a variant with a certain unique UMIs count to be called. Only variants with a unique UMI count >= min_variant_umi will be called. The value of this parameter defaults to 5*

**--alpha=INT/FLOAT**\
*This is the type I error probability known as alpha level. Positions with a p-value/q-value >= alpha will be considered as noisy and variants in these positions won't be called. The value of this parameter defaults to 0.05 (5%)*

**--strand_bias_method=STR**\
*This parameter lets you specifiy the method you want to use to calculate variant strand bias. The value can only be "default" or "torrent_suite". Choosing any of the methods can have minimal effect on the final variants called and the SB value differs: the torrent suite method generates SB values [0.5;1] but the default method generates SB values [0;+Inf]. Obviously, this parameter defaults to the value "default"*

**--max_strand_bias=INT/FLOAT**\
*The minimum strand bias value for a variant with a certain negative and positive coverage to be called. Only variants with a strand bias <= max_strand_bias will be called.The value of this parameter defaults to 1.0 for the default method and to 0.743 for the torrent suite method*

**--max_hp_length=INT**\
*The maximum homopolymer length for a variant at a certain position in an homopolymer region to be called. Only variants with a homopolymer length <= max_hp_length will be called. The value of this parameter defaults to 10*

**--gvcf=BOOL**\
*This is an experimental feature that is turned off by default and that, if set tpo True, will generate a gVCF file along the normal VCF file*

**--keep_pileup=BOOL**\
*This lets the user keep or delete the generated pileup file. By default, this parameter is set to True*

### Example

    python3 umi-varcal.py call -i /home/.../test.sam -b /home/.../design.bed -f /home/.../hg19.fa -p /home/.../test.pileup -o /home/.../out -c 3 --min_base_quality 15 --min_read_quality 25 --min_mapping_quality 40 --min_variant_umi 7 --strand_bias_method default --max_strand_bias 0.8 --alpha 0.01 --max_hp_length 5 --gvcf True --keep_pileup False


### Output

* A VCF file (<INPUT_NAME>.vcf) containing all the variants that
	were successfully called.

* A gVCF file (<INPUT_NAME>.gvcf) containing all the variants that
	were successfully called + informations for the blocks in which
	no variant was detected.
	
* A VARIANTS file (<INPUT_NAME>.variants) containing all the variants
	that were successfully called. This file contains the same variants of
	the VCF file, in addition to detailed metrics about the variants.

* A PILEUP file (<INPUT_NAME>.pileup) corresponding to the entire pileup dumped.
    This file is produced in the output directory. This file can be used to skip 
    the pileup building and load it instead if the analysis was already done.




